:page/title Coding viagra
:blog-post/tags [:tech ]
:blog-post/author {:person/id :einarwh}

<!-- :blog-post/published #time/ldt "2014-12-27T00:00:00" -->

:page/body

# Coding viagra

<p class="blog-post-date">March 1, 2026</p>

Sometimes I doubt the sagacity of publishing something I've written; other times, I know it is unwise. And yet here we are. After all, what is the purpose of this blog but to put down in writing the observations that I make and the thoughts that pop into my head? In particular if the observations and thoughts are about phenomena that seem true to me, sometimes glaringly so, yet no-one else seems to be writing about them.

So here is an observation and a thought: LLM-based coding assistants are coding viagra for CTO's.

Of course by CTO's I don't necessarily mean literal CTO's, but any _CTO-like_ person. You know what I mean. A person who used to be so-called _technical_, who used to build software and to enjoy it, but who has, for various reasons stopped doing so. An common and obvious one is that they have been increasingly sucked into other parts of the business of software.

This is fine career-wise of course. But where does it leave them psychologically? Here's a possible profile or pattern: programming used to be an important part of their identity, and remains part of their bedrock. The idea that they _could still do it_ is somehow a life-line, and something that grounds them. Yet at the same time, they suffer under a growing suspicion that it may not be true, that the bedrock has slowly turned to clay. There's just too much _stuff_ that has accumulated in the meantime, too much complexity, too many iterations of the hamster wheel of technologies. Whenever they've tried to program in the recent past, they've been overwhelmed and given up before trying in anger, in order to preserve the life-line. But in their subconsciousness, a gnawing fear that they've lost the ability to build continues to accumulate. They suspect that at some point they will have to contend with the fact that they've _lost the ability to perform_ as programmers as it were.

Enter coding assistants. Suddenly, the crippling complexity seems to vanish! Or rather it no longer poses an obstacle. The assistants effortlessly translate simply worded intent and wishes into the necessary incantations and artifacts needed to bring about the Frankensteinian monster of accidental complexity known as the modern SPA. Not only that, it even seems to do what was intended and wished! Everything springs back into life, the way it used to be in the good old days! It's possible to build again! The builder's high is back, the feeling that brought them into the tech industry in the first place! Predictably, this unleashes a veritable building spree, where they build more things (never mind what things!) in a week than the last ten years combined. This is why I compare it to when a man's ability to have an erection is resuscitated by medical means. It's like they're 17 years old again: I HAVE AN ERECTION AND IT IS THE MOST MAGNIFICENT THING IN THE WORLD!

Now, at this point it's worth pausing to reflect a bit, and ask some important questions. Isn't this just great? A miracle of medicine? Am I really poking fun at this somehow? If so, isn't that just ablist gatekeeping?

To be clear: I encourage anyone to enjoy their erections, metaphorical or otherwise. That's fine, joyous even, I celebrate it. But it is also important to frame the experience in some kind of perspective (even when, and in particular since, the aroused state that we are discussing is not necessarily when one is most clear-headed). It is easy to forget that it is not a unique and revolutionary state of affairs. In fact, it's entirely commonplace. There are people all over the world having erections all the time. In terms of the metaphor, while the CTO may not have been building software for the last ten years, others have. For these people, using coding assistants may be less transformative than the CTO is led to believe by their own experience.

When men without erectile dysfunction take viagra it typically doesn't improve their sexual performance. What's more, it can cause significant side effects. We may see something similar for programmers and coding assistants. Coding assistants are particularly effective in the "from nothing to something" phase (which is typically what people who have fallen out of programming struggle with). Hence we may revert to seeing building software as a one-time thing, and forget what we really know: that the initial act of building is not the most important part of software development. Much like in human reproduction, the first part is great fun, but the real work takes place afterwards. The challenge is not in building something, but in building something good that can evolve and deliver value over time. That is what requires real care and skill, and a deep understanding of both the technology and the domain. It is undermined when we leapfrog the need to both define and understand what we are doing.

Incidentally, this is why vibe coders are quick to label what they've built as "experiments" and "prototypes". They position it as a starting point, with the implication that it could be turned into a viable long-term solution as well with a little polish. But that's not necessarily true. There may not be a path from something to something acceptable or useful. I am fond of quoting Weinberg's zeroth law of software development: "If the software doesn't have to work, you can always meet any other requirement."

Now where does this leave us? I understand where the enthusiasm of those who feel that they have regained the ability to build software with the help of coding assistants comes from. It certainly is a damning testament to the unreasonable amounts of accidental complexity we have amassed in this industry. Getting an erection is just too hard these days. But I don't think that relying on coding assistants to pretend away the complexity will be healthy in the long run. After all, it remains _there_ in what is built, with all its corner cases and vulnerabilities and things that no-one thought to think about. Instead we should have worked at making it easier. I fear that the industry will get a better, more devastating lesson in systems behaviour than anyone could have dreamed of in the coming years.
